# Marathos lab

**Purpose** of this project is to use your knowledge of Databricks and data engineering to build data
platform and pipeline for business stakeholders to aid in data driven decisions. You are working for a
global company called Marathos, which hosts marathons all over the world.

Image generated by Nano Banana 2.

## Background

Marathos is a traditional company that have been hosting marathons during very long time. They have
started their digital and data journey, which they plan to expand. They have through LinkedIn seen some
students in Yrkeshögskola post cool data engineering projects, both within data platforms and data
visualization. Now they want to have a collaboration project with your school, to showcase a project
within their particular tech stack. The tech stack for Marathos are:

```
databricks
python
pyspark
plotly
git and github
more but not relevant for this project
```
Their current data engineer have specified some tasks that they want you to complete for this project.

## Task 0 - onboarding

a) Go through 04 - 10 in this github repository to learn the very basics of medallion architecture and
databricks.

b) Also create a github repository and link it to your databricks account so that you can commit and push
code from databricks to that repo. If you have forgotten how to do this - follow 01 _databricks_setup. Do
this even if you have a code alongs repo as this is a good practice to setup from scratch again.

c) Create one ETL pipeline in your repo that will have the following folder structure


```
marathos_<fname>_<lname>
├── dimensional_modeling
├── explorations
├── transformations
│ ├── bronze
│ ├── gold
│ └── silver
└── utils
```
d) Now create an SQL script or a notebook to build up the unity catalog to look like this.

```
marathos
├── bronze
├── default
│ └── raw
├── gold
├── information_schema
└── silver
```
Now upload this dataset into your unity catalog. Note that you may choose to have more directories
inside of the volume if you need.

## Task 1 - EDA

Create an EDA of the data. Here are some simple questions to follow as a starting point

```
find out number of rows
find out number of columns
check schema if you have inferred it or specify an appropriate schema
descriptive summary of numerical fields
count nulls for each field
how many unique events are their?
how are ages distributed among the runners?
which countries are most represented?
```
## Task 2 - Bronze layer

Ingest the data into the bronze layer.

## Task 3 - Silver layer

Clean the data and output a one big table (obt) of the cleaned data. Here are some starting point to
investigate

```
check validity status of event and performance
if event has unit km or mi then performance should be in h
if event has unit h then performance should be in km
```

```
remove all invalid rows (for simplicity you can consider d (days) as invalid and remove it)
convert time of athelete performance to appropriate data type
```
Create relevant ids, which will be important later on dimensional modeling.

For the ids for example event_id you can use the function dense_rank() to produce the id based on
event_name. Here is an example code snippet

```
from pyspark.sql.functions import dense_rank
from pyspark.sql.window import Window
```
```
w = Window.orderBy("Event name")
df.withColumn("event_id", dense_rank().over(w)).select(
"Event name", "event_id"
).display()
```
Other cleaning of your choice ...

## Task 4 - Dimensional modeling

The data engineer has provided you with a starting dimensional model that you should continue
developing.

Here is a starting dbml code for the dimensional model that you can directly paste into dbdiagram.

```
Table fct_results {
result_id integer
event_id integer
performance float
// more columns
}
```
```
Table dim_event {
event_id integer [primary key, ref:< fct_results.event_id]
event_type string
// more columns
}
```
```
Table dim_athlete {
athlete_id integer
// more columns
}
```
## Task 5 - Gold layer

Build your gold layer based on your dimensional model. For this layer you should also create at least two
views for each of the marathon types (distance or length). Feel free to create more marts.


## Task 6 - Dashboard

Build a user friendly dashboard that shows a few metrics, a few graphs and a link to genie chatbot, see
task 7.

## Task 7 - Marathos Genie

Business stakeholders really enjoy to ask questions to data analyst about the data and the data analysts
usually perform ad hoc SQL queries on the data to answer their questions. In this task you will create a
Genie for Marathos, where stakeholders can ask questions to instead of disturbing the data analysts with
these simple ad hoc questions. Make sure to link appropriate datasets to Marathos Genie.

Before we can give this to the stakeholders to play, it's very important for the data engineer that the
answers are reliable or else the data team is screwed. Write a few questions or click on a few questions
recommended questions and then do manual calculations in a notebook to verify the correctness of the
outputs.

## BONUS

```
country data - either use LLM to simulate good guess of abbreviations or find a real one. Ingest this
data in and use it to enhance the downstream layers.
use LLM to create a new marathon with data and place it in to unity catalog and stream it
schedule the pipeline
dashboard is comprehensive and have good insights
correct terminology and language when presenting in the video
create a date dimension - here you can use the starting date, but note that the data is very tedious
```
## Task 8 - Video

Create a 5 - 10 min long video where you showcase your dashboard, describe your data pipeline and
shortly your code structure. Also make sure to demo the things you have done, for example Genie, ETL
pipeline, and also other things that you have done in BONUS you should also demo them.

## Submission

Hand in the following to your learning platform:

```
a link to your public github repository for this lab
a link to your video recording (for example you could use unlisted youtube video)
```
## Grading

If you have taken ideas of codes from someone or used LLM, it is **important** that you state the source
and understand how the codes work. Write a comment next to these codes. LLM is okay for smaller tasks,
asking for ideas, concepts but not for solving entire tasks.

### Criteria for G:

```
several relevant commits
video is clear and shows you understand what you have developed
```

```
solved all tasks excluding BONUS
```
### Criteria for VG:

```
implemented the BONUS parts
video is clear and holds high technical quality with correct terminologies
code is well structured following DRY principle
repo is well structured
```
